# Week 2: Basic Point-Set Topology 2

## Some Topologies as Universal Constructions

### Absolute bare minimum category theory needed for this to make sense

Just read [these blog posts](https://www.math3ma.com/categories/category-theory)
first.

- For now, just think of a category as a giant "meta-space of spaces." There is
  one for every type of spaces that you might want to consider. For instance,
  the "collection" of all topological spaces is a category.
- Categories have objects and arrows. The objects are the spaces, and the
  arrows are the relationships between them. In the category of topological
  spaces, the objects are topological spaces, and the arrows (also called
  morphisms) are continuous functions.
- In category theory, we are often concerned with _diagrams_. These have a
  technical meaning that is not that important, because you are intuitively
  familiar with diagrams. It's a bunch of objects and maps between them.
  Unless otherwise specified, diagrams are usually only interesting if they
  are _commutative_.
- Another important concept in category theory is _universality_. This shows up
  in one of two ways: An object $A$ is called _initial_ if for all $B$, there
  is a unique morphism $A\to B$. Conversely $Z$ is called _terminal_ if for
  all $Y$, there is a unique morphism $Y\to Z$.

A _cone_ over a diagram is an object that maps to every object in the diagram,
in a way such that all "triangles" commute. Keeping in mind that everything in
category theory is a category, there is a category of cones over a diagram.
Likewise, there is a category of co-cones under a diagram (arrows generally move
down and to the right. An object is _initial_ in a category if it has a unique
map to every other object. Likewise an object is _terminal_ if it accepts a
unique map from every other object.

The _limit_ of a diagram is the terminal co-cone (if it exists) over the
diagram, and the _colimit_ of the diagram is the initial co-cone onder the
diagram. The product is the limit over the factors, and the quotient is the
colimit of a surjection.

In the category of topological spaces, the limits of diagrams are always endowed
with the finest possible topology that allows the cone maps, and colimits are
always endowed with the coarsest possible topology that allow the co-cone maps to
exist. For a relatively straightforward illustration, note that all maps from
the discrete topology are continuous and all maps to the indiscrete topology are
continuous.

More generally, another explanation for why you should think of fine topologies
as "sitting to the left of" coarse topologies is that if a set $X$ is endowed
with two topologies $\mathcal{T}_1$ and $\mathcal{T}_2$, forming distinct
_topological spaces_ $X_1$ and $X_2$, then the identity map $X_1 \to X_2$ is
continuous if and only if $\mathcal{T}_1$ is finer than $\mathcal{T}_2$.

### Product Topology

Ok, with that in mind, we can now see why the product topology is not the box
topology for infinite products. By definition, the product topology is generated
by the sub-basis given by preimages of open sets under the projection maps, and
this gives the coarsest possible topology with these sets open (i.e., with the
projection maps continuous... Refer to the previous paragraph...).

However, the basis generated by this sub-basis is _not_ the set of all boxes.
Due to the finite intersection property of producing a basis from a sub-basis,
it is as originally defined.

Another remark is that it isn't trivial to a category theorist that the
underlying set should even be the cartesian product. But the continuity of the
forgetful functor from Top to Set implies it.

Nice properties of product spaces:

1. Products of Hausdorff spaces are Housdorff.
2. Taking the product of the closures of subsets in the factors is equivalent to
   taking the closure of the product of those subsets.

### Quotient Topology

This requires a bit of a setup. Suppose we have a surjection $q:X\to Y$, where
$X$ is a topological space and $Y$ is any _set_. Note that even ignoring
continuity, the preimages of points of $Y$ form a partition of $X$. Let
$X^\ast$ be the set consisting of the parts of this partition, and let $p:X\to
X^\ast$ be the map that takes a point to its equivalence class. Let
$f:X^\ast\to Y$ be the function which takes an equivalence class $[x]$ to
$q(x)$. Then by definition of the partition forming $X^\ast$, $f$ is
well-defined. It is also a bijection, so as sets, we can generally identify the
image of anyh bijection with the set $X^\ast$ defined in this construction.
This is to say, that any surjection can be represented by some identification of
points under an equivalence relation.

There is a natural topology on $X^\ast$ which can be defined as the _finest_
topology that makes $p$ continuous. This is defined by allowing the open sets
to be any set whose pre-image under $p$ is open.

Similarly, we can define the analogous topology on $Y$. Both of these
topologies are referred to as _the quotient topology_. Note that the quotient
topology endows $p$ (also $q$) with the property of being an _open map_.

### Subspace Topology

Not a lot to say here. It also has a categorical definition (coarsest topology
to make an injection continuous). Note the open sets of $A\subseteq X$ are
therefore the intersections of open sets of $X$ with $A$. This means they may
not be open in $X$ (only if $A$ is open in $X$).

### Some other notes along these lines

Other things I read that sound interesting. Ignore for now.

- Functors generalize points (Huh?). This is related to the Yoneda lemma, which
  allows a very modern perspective on topology and geometry called the
  _Functor of Points Perspective_ (or maybe the _Grothendieck School_). Very
  abstract stuff, but basically it says that spaces are completely determined
  by their relationships to other spaces. For more, see
  [here](https://www.math3ma.com/blog/the-yoneda-perspective).
- Filters generalize sequences. This is pretty clear from the definion. It's
  nice too, since filters are categorical constructions (sorta) and work in
  more general spaces.

## Algebraic Constructions

Probably some or all of this gets pushed to week 3, so I will be very brief.

From Munkres (beginning of chapter 9): Why study homotopy groups? Because it's
easy to prove that spaces are homeomorphic. But to show two spaces are _not_
homeomorphic (using only existence), you'd have to show that _no_ homeomorphism
exists. Much better to show that they have different invariants. Consider
proving that $\mathbb{R}^2$ and $\mathbb{R}^3$ are not homeomorphic. The
"basic" point-set properties that we know of are the same for each space
(connectedness, compactness, metrizability, separability, etc.). To Truly
differentiate between them as topological spaces, you'd need to discuss
dimension. But we're not allowed to do geometry in topology class, so we have
to beat around the bush and use notions like "simple connectedness". This is a
really deep concept that is often discussed in calculus 3 for some reason.

### Homotopies and the Homotopy category

Homotopies are continuous deformations of maps, but we often talk of spaces as
being homotopy-equivalent. This is because the modding out of maps induces a
quotient of categories, which identifies morphisms by homotopy. This also
identifies spaces because isomorphism in the homotopy category is a weaker
condition then isomorphism in Top.

#### Products of paths respect homotopy classes

There is a natural way of concatenating paths. Turns out, this respects the
homotopy classes of the factors. I.e., if $f_1$ and $f_2$ are paths from $x_1$
to $x_2$ and $g_1$ and $g_2$ are paths from $x_2$ to $x_3$. And moreover, if
$f_1\sim f_2$ and $g_1\sim g_2$, then

$$
[f_1\ast g_1] \sim [f_2\ast g_1] \ast [f_1\ast g_2] \ast [f_2\ast g_2]
\text{ "=" } [f_1]\ast[g_1]
$$

#### Pointed spaces and homotopy equivalence

Paths have a tendency to wander. By this, what I mean is that products of paths
is really a groupoid operation. But we want to do group theory, which means we
need to fix a point. This is where pointed spaces come in handy. A pointed
space is simply a topological space with a "distinguished point". Maps between
$(X, x)$ and $(Y, y)$ are simply continuous functions with the added condition
that base points are mapped to each other.

### Cell Complexes

## Homotopy Groups
